Ma 1 abc. Calculus of One and Several Variables and Linear Algebra. 9 units (4-0-5); first, second, third terms. Prerequisites: high-school algebra, trigonometry, and calculus. Special section of Ma 1 a, 12 units (5-0-7). Review of calculus. Complex numbers, Taylor polynomials, infinite series. Comprehensive presentation of linear algebra. Derivatives of vector functions, multiple integrals, line and path integrals, theorems of Green and Stokes. Ma 1 b, c is divided into two tracks: analytic and practical. Students will be given information helping them to choose a track at the end of the fall term. There will be a special section or sections of Ma 1 a for those students who, because of their background, require more calculus than is provided in the regular Ma 1 a sequence. These students will not learn series in Ma 1 a and will be required to take Ma 1 d. Instructors: Amir Khosravi, Ramakrishnan, Kechris, Rains, Flach, Katz.
Ph 1 abc. Classical Mechanics and Electromagnetism. 9 units (4-0-5); first, second, third terms. The first year of a two-year course in introductory classical and modern physics. Topics: Newtonian mechanics in Ph 1 a; electricity and magnetism, and special relativity, in Ph 1 b, c. Emphasis on physical insight and problem solving. Ph 1 b, c is divided into two tracks: the Practical Track emphasizing practical electricity, and the Analytic Track, which teaches and uses methods of multivariable calculus. Students enrolled in the Practical Track are encouraged to take Ph 8 bc concurrently. Students will be given information helping them to choose a track at the end of fall term. Instructors: Cheung, Hsieh, Refael, Alicea.
Ch 1 ab. General Chemistry. 6 units; 9 units; a (3-0-3) first term; b (4-0-5) second term. Lectures and recitations dealing with the principles of chemistry. First term: Chemical bonding—electronic structure of atoms, periodic properties, ionic substances, covalent bonding, Lewis representations of molecules and ions, shapes of molecules, Lewis acids and bases, Bronsted acids and bases, hybridization and resonance, bonding in solids. Second term: Chemical dynamics—spectroscopy, thermodynamics, kinetics, chemical equilibria, electrochemistry, and introduction to organic chemistry. Graded pass/fail. Instructors: Lewis (a), Robb, Miller (b).
Ch 3 a. Fundamental Techniques of Experimental Chemistry. 6 units (1-3-2); first, second, third terms. Introduces the basic principles and techniques of synthesis and analysis and develops the laboratory skills and precision that are fundamental to experimental chemistry. Freshmen who have gained advanced placement into Ch 41 or Ch 21, or who are enrolled in Ch 10, are encouraged to take Ch 3 a in the fall term. Freshmen who enter in academic years 2017, 2018, and 2019 must take Ch 3 a in their first nine terms of residence in order to be graded pass/fail. Freshmen entering in academic year 2020 and thereafter must take Ch 3 a in their first six terms of residence in order to be graded pass/fail. Instructor: Mendez.
Ch 3 x. Experimental Methods in Solar Energy Conversion. 6 units (1-3-2); first, second, third terms. Introduces concepts and laboratory methods in chemistry and materials science centered on the theme of solar energy conversion and storage. Students will perform experiments involving optical spectroscopy, electrochemistry, laser spectroscopy, photochemistry, and photoelectrochemistry, culminating in the construction and testing of dye-sensitized solar cells. Pass/fail grading conditions are the same as for Ch 3a above. Instructor: Mendez.
Bi 1. Principles of Biology—The great theories of biology and their influence in the modern world. 9 units (4-0-5); third term. There are three overarching theories in biology: the theory of the cell, the theory of the gene, and the theory of evolution. Each of them has had major impacts on our lives—for example the concept of the gene has led to treatments for inherited diseases, personalized and genomic medicine, forensic DNA testing, and modern agriculture. Each theory will be discussed from its 19th century origin to its standing in the 21st century, and the scientific understanding and societal impact of each will be sampled. The course will also ask if there is yet a theory of the brain, and if not, how one might be framed. The course is designed to teach what technically adept members of society should know about biology. Instructors: Meyerowitz, Zinn.
Bi 1 x. The Great Ideas of Biology: Exploration through Experimentation. 9 units (0-6-3); third term. Introduction to concepts and laboratory methods in biology. Molecular biology techniques and advanced microscopy will be combined to explore the great ideas of biology. This course is intended for nonbiology majors and will satisfy the freshman biology course requirement. Limited enrollment. Instructor: Bois.
Ay 1. The Evolving Universe. 9 units (3-3-3); third term; This course is intended primarily for freshmen not expecting to take more advanced astronomy courses and will satisfy the menu requirement of the Caltech core curriculum. Introduction to modern astronomy that will illustrate the accomplishments, techniques, and scientific methodology of contemporary astronomy. The course will be organized around a set of basic questions, showing how our answers have changed in response to fresh observational discoveries. Topics to be discussed will include telescopes, stars, planets, the search for life elsewhere in the universe, supernovae, pulsars, black holes, galaxies and their active nuclei, and Big Bang cosmology. A field trip to Palomar Observatory will be organized. Not offered on a pass/fail basis. Instructor: Djorgovski
ESE 1. Earth’s Climate. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. An introduction to the coupling between atmospheric composition and climate on Earth. How Earth’s climate has changed in the past and its evolving response to the rapid increase in carbon dioxide and methane happening today. Model projections of future climate and associated risks. Development of climate policies in face of uncertainty in these projections and risks. Enrollment is limited. Satisfies the menu requirement of the Caltech core curriculum. Juniors and Seniors who have satisfied their menu course requirement should enroll in ESE 101. Instructor: Wennberg.
Ge 1. Earth and Environment. 9 units (3-3-3); third term. An introduction to the ideas and approaches of earth and planetary sciences, including both the special challenges and viewpoints of these kinds of science as well as the ways in which basic physics, chemistry, and biology relate to them. In addition to a wide-ranging lecture-oriented component, there will be a required field trip component. The lectures and topics cover such issues as solid Earth structure and evolution, plate tectonics, oceans and atmospheres, climate change, and the relationship between geological and biological evolution. Not offered on a pass/fail basis. Instructor: Asimow. Satisfies the menu requirement of the Caltech core curriculum.
IST 4. Information and Logic. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. The course explains the key concepts at the foundations of computing with physical substrates, including representations of numbers, Boolean algebra as an axiomatic system, Boolean functions and their representations, composition of functions and relations, implementing functions with circuits, circuit complexity, representation of computational processes with state diagrams, state diagrams as a composition of Boolean functions and memory, and the implementation of computational processes with finite state machines. The basic concepts covered in the course are connected to advanced topics like programming, computability, logic, complexity theory, information theory, and biochemical systems. Not offered on a pass/fail basis. Satisfies the menu requirement of the Caltech core curriculum. Instructor: Bruck.
EE 1. The Science of Data, Signals, and Information. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Electrical Engineering has given rise to many key developments at the interface between the physical world and the information world. Fundamental ideas in data acquisition, sampling, signal representation, and quantification of information have their origin in electrical engineering.This course introduces these ideas and discusses signal representations, the interplay between time and frequency domains, difference equations and filtering, noise and denoising, data transmission over channels with limited capacity, signal quantization, feedback and neural networks, and how humans interpret data and information. Applications in various areas of science and engineering are covered. Satisfies the menu requirement of the Caltech core curriculum. Instructor: Vaidyanathan.
APh/EE 9 ab. Solid-State Electronics for Integrated Circuits. 6 units (2-2-2); first, third terms; six units credit for the freshman laboratory requirement. Prerequisite: Successful completion of APh/EE 9 a is a prerequisite for enrollment in APh/EE 9 b. Introduction to solid-state electronics, including physical modeling and device fabrication. Topics: semiconductor crystal growth and device fabrication technology, carrier modeling, doping, generation and recombination, pn junction diodes, MOS capacitor and MOS transistor operation, and deviations from ideal behavior. Laboratory includes computer-aided layout, and fabrication and testing of light-emitting diodes, transistors, and inverters. Students learn photolithography, and use of vacuum systems, furnaces, and device-testing equipment. Instructor: Scherer.
APh 24. Introductory Modern Optics Laboratory. 6 units (0-4-2); third term. Prerequisite: APh 23. Laboratory experiments to acquaint students with the contemporary aspects of modern optical research and technology. Experiments encompass many of the topics and concepts covered in APh 23. Instructor: Faraon.
Bi 10. Introductory Biology Laboratory. 6 units (1-3-2); third term. Prerequisites: Bi 8; designed to be taken concurrently with Bi 9. An introduction to molecular, cellular, and biochemical techniques that are commonly used in studies of biological systems at the molecular level. Instructor: Staff.
Ch 4 ab. Synthesis and Analysis of Organic and Inorganic Compounds. 9 units (1-6-2). Prerequisites: Ch 1 (or the equivalent) and Ch 3 a or Ch 3 x. Ch 4 a is a prerequisite for Ch 4 b. Previous or concurrent enrollment in Ch 41 is strongly recommended. Introduction to methods of synthesis, separation, purification, and characterization used routinely in chemical research laboratories. Ch 4 a focuses on the synthesis and analysis of organic molecules; Ch 4 b focuses on the synthesis and analysis of inorganic and organometallic molecules. Ch 4 a, second term; Ch 4 b, third term. Instructor: Mendez.
Ch 8. Experimental Procedures of Synthetic Chemistry for Premedical Students. 9 units (1-6-2); first term. Prerequisites: Ch 1 ab and Ch 3 a or Ch 3 x. Previous or concurrent enrollment in Ch 41 is strongly recommended. Open to non-pre-medical students, as space allows. Introduction to methods of extraction, synthesis, separation and purification, and spectroscopic characterization of Aspirin, Tylenol, and medical test strips. Instructor: Mendez.
Ch/ChE 9. Chemical Synthesis and Characterization for Chemical Engineering. 9 units (1-6-2); third term. Prerequisites: Ch 1 ab and Ch 3 a or Ch 3 x. Previous or concurrent enrollment in Ch 41 is strongly recommended. Instruction in synthesis, separation, purification, and physical and spectroscopic characterization procedures of model organic and organometallic compounds. Specific emphasis will be focused on following the scientific method in the study of model organic and inorganic materials. Enrollment priority given to chemical engineering majors. Instructor: Mendez.
EE/ME 7. Introduction to Mechatronics. 6 units (2-3-1); first term. Mechatronics is the multi-disciplinary design of electro-mechanical systems. This course is intended to give the student a basic introduction to such systems. The course will focus on the implementations of sensor and actuator systems, the mechanical devices involved and the electrical circuits needed to interface with them. The class will consist of lectures and short labs where the student will be able to investigate the concepts discussed in lecture. Topics covered include motors, piezoelectric devices, light sensors, ultrasonic transducers, and navigational sensors such as accelerometers and gyroscopes. Graded pass/fail. Instructor: George.
Ge 116. Analytical Techniques Laboratory. 9 units (1-4-4); second term. Prerequisites: Ge 114 a or instructor’s permission. Methods of quantitative laboratory analysis of rocks, minerals, and fluids in geological and planetary sciences. Consists of five intensive two-week modules covering scanning electron microscopy (imaging, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, electron backscatter diffraction); the electron microprobe (wavelength-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy); X-ray powder diffraction; optical, infrared, and Raman spectroscopy; and plasma source mass spectrometry for elemental and radiogenic isotope analysis. Satisfies the Institute core requirement for an additional introductory laboratory course. Instructors: Asimow, Jackson, Rossman.
Ph 3. Introductory Physics Laboratory. 6 units (0-3-3); first, second, third terms. Prerequisites: Ph 1 a or instructor’s permission. Introduction to experimental physics and data analysis, with techniques relevant to all fields that deal in quantitative data. Specific physics topics include ion trapping, harmonic motion, mechanical resonance, and precision interferometry. Broader skills covered include introductions to essential electronic equipment used in modern research labs, basic digital data acquisition and analysis, statistical interpretation of quantitative data, professional record keeping and documentation of experimental research, and an introduction to the Mathematica programming language. Only one term may be taken for credit. Instructors: Black, Libbrecht.
Ph 5. Analog Electronics for Physicists. 9 units (0-5-4); first term. Prerequisites: Ph1abc, Ma1abc, Ma2 taken concurrently. A fast-paced laboratory course covering the design, construction, and testing of practical analog and interface circuits, with emphasis on applications of operational amplifiers. No prior experience with electronics is required. Basic linear and nonlinear elements and circuits are studied, including amplifiers, filters, oscillators and other signal conditioning circuits. Each week includes a 45 minute lecture/recitation and a 2½ hour laboratory. The course culminates in a two-week project of the student’s choosing. Instructors: Rice, Libbrecht.
Ph 8 bc. Experiments in Electromagnetism. 3 units (0-3-0); second, third terms. Prerequisite: Ph 1 a. A two-term sequence of experiments that parallel the material of Ph 1 bc. It includes measuring the force between wires with a homemade analytical balance, measuring properties of a 1,000-volt spark, and building and studying a radio-wave transmitter and receiver. The take-home experiments are constructed from a kit of tools and electronic parts. Measurements are compared to theoretical expectations. Instructor: Spiropulu.
En/Wr 84. Writing About Science. 9 units (3-0-6); third term. Instruction and practice in writing about science and technology for non-specialist audiences. The course considers how to convey complex technical information in clear, engaging prose in a variety of contexts. Readings in different genres (newspaper journalism, creative non-fiction, and advocacy) raise issues for discussion and serve as models for preliminary writing assignments. A more substantial final project will be on a topic and in the genre of the student’s choosing. Includes oral presentation. Satisfies the Institute scientific writing requirement and the option oral communications requirement for humanities majors. Instructor: Hall, S.
